Hi and welcome to day one of take ten
over the next ten days i will be showing you
how to get a little more headspace in your life

the starting point is to get familiar 
with very simple and easy to learn exersize 
and than just commit to doing it each day

remember: this is your ten minutes
so all you have to do is sit back, relax and 
allow your body and mind to unwind

to begin with once you are sitting comfortably 
i'd like you to gently close your eyes

begin by take a few deep breath
breathing in throught the nose
and out throught the mouth

as you breath in throught the nose
i'd like you to focus on your chest expending,
lungs filling with air

and as you breath out
noticing how the body softens each time.
lets go of any tension as the body exhales.

just do it two or three times
breathing in throught the nose
and out throught the mouth

and then you just allow your breath  
to return to it's natural rythm
in and out throught the nose

when closing your eyes 
you probably become 
a lot more aware 
of your other physical sences.
so begin with 
just allow you focusing your attention
on sensetion of touch. 

and in particular - the feeling of the body, 
pressing down on the chair beneath you.
just notice weather weight fulls evenly 
down throught the middle of the body
or weather it perhaps leaning
a little more to the left or to the right.

in the same way, 
i'd like you to notice a sensation 
of the south of the feet on the floor. 
noticing where the point of contact is strongest.
whether the heel, the toe, 
the inside, or the outside of the foot.

and in the same way just 
noticing the weight of the hands 
and the arms just resting 
in the lap on your legs

I also let you to notice any sounds.
very often sounds seen as obstacle,
something that gets in a way of quite mind,
but in this exercise you can make use of those sounds.
so take ten or twenty seconds just to notice 
all the different little sounds around you
no matter how pleasent or how unpleasent you find them.

and just gently bring your attention back to the body.
notice how your body feels as you sit normally,
busy, doing things, thinking about things, 
not realy aware of how the body feels.
just to help you do this 
what I allow you to do is 
starting at the top of your head
take twenty seconds or so 
just to mentally scan down
throught the body. 
noticing which parts of the body
feel relaxed, comfortable and at ease
and which parts of the body feels perheps tense or tighten. 

you don't have to do anything,
you don't have change anything 
you just building up a picture of how the body feels

don't worry too mush if your mind wonders off.
it's perfectly normal.
but as soon as you realize you've been distracted and wonder off,
just jently bring attention back again to those physical feelings
as you scan down throught the body.

and as you're doing this,
you might begin to notice as well
the underlyeing mood or emotional quality of the mind.
it's not something to analize of judge,
just something to notice if it's obvious.

now you've probably already noticed 
that as you sit there your body breath 
and creates sort of rising and falling sensation
you might feel this in your stomach, 
it may be around your diafragm, the chest, the shoulders. 
it doesn't really matter where it is,
and you don't need to breath in any particular way.
just allow the body to breath naturally,
just noticing where in the body 
you feel that movement most strongly,
and the rhythm of the breath. 
is the breath long or shot?
is it deep or shallow?
just take a few moments to follow that movement,
that rising and falling sensation.

and just to help you maintain your focus on the breath,
what I allow your to do next 
is to slowly begin to count the breathes as they pass.
so, as you feel the rising sensetion you count one - just silenly.
as you feel the falling sensation you count two, than three, than four.
just top to account of ten.
when you get to ten you can stop and start again at one.
just try this couple a times throught. 
remember: it's not thinking about the breath.
it's simply being aware of it, following it as it comes and goes.

remember: don't worry too much if mind wonders off
it's perfectly normal
but as soon as you realize it's wondered 
just gently bring attention back
to that rising and falling sensation.
just pick it up on the number you left it on.

and just for the moment 
I'd like you to let go of any focus at all.
just let your mind do what ever it wants to do. 
if it wants to think - let it think.
if it wants to be busy - let it be busy.
no sence of affort or control.
just allow your mind to be completly free.

and than just bring the attention back to the body,
back to that sensetion of body on a chair, 
feet on a floor, 
the hands in the arms just resting on the legs (da faq?!) 

once again, notice any sounds. 
just bringing your mind back to physical sences,
back to your immediate environment 

and in your own time 
you can just gently open the eyes. 
and have a stretch when you are ready.

how was it? 
feel more relaxed? calmer? 
having taken ten minutes out of your day?
don't worry to much if you didn't.
and don't worry at all if you're experiencing lost of thoughts.
it's perfectly normal at this stage,
and it changes from day to day. 
so make sure you come back tomorrow for day two,
when we carry on take ten.
